# UF2 Batch Flasher

The UF2 Batch Flasher is meant to provide a way to loop over up to 64 devices,
in order to flash all the 64 devices with a single
[UF2](https://github.com/microsoft/uf2) image. Using a Raspberry Pi Pico, and 64
USB A ports, the RP2040 will select one port at a time, and copy the transmitted
image to each device.

The alternative is to find the next cable, find the board at the end of it,
press a button, plug the cable while pressing the button, type a command / drag
a file over, unplug the device and repeat this 63 times. Not only this error
prone but this is time intensive and would probably take half an hour to iterate
over that many devices manually.

![](https://www.nbp.name/projects/uf2-batch-flasher/over-board.jpg "Picture of the First version of the UF2 Batch Flasher board")

# Building the Hardware

The board design is designed using [KiCad](https://www.kicad.org/) and the
sources are located under the PCB directory. The Vendor links to Mouser are
listed as part of the component descriptions, and as of beginning of 2024, there
is [approximately 270â‚¬ of components and
PCB](https://www.nbp.name/projects/uf2-batch-flasher/#bill-of-material) to build
a single one.

# Building the Firmware

The firmware dependencies are managed with [Nix](https://nixos.org/) and
composed of the [Pico-SDK](https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk),
[Cyw43-driver](https://github.com/georgerobotics/cyw43-driver),
[LwIP](https://github.com/lwip-tcpip/lwip),
[TinyUSB](https://github.com/hathach/tinyusb) and
[Pico-PIO-USB](https://github.com/sekigon-gonnoc/Pico-PIO-USB).

In the root of the repository, type the following command to start a development
environment:

```shell
$ nix develop
```

This development environement will setup the expected environment variable and
provide a few useful functions such as `build` and `flash`. Other commands for
debugging are available such as `start_uart`, `start_openocd` and
`start_gdb_core0`, and listed in `firmware/shell.nix`.

Before building, you should configure the Wifi network credential by creating
the file `firmware/wifi.cmake`. A template file is available at
`firmware/wiki.cmake.template`.

To build just type `build` in this new environement and it would invoke `cmake`
and generate its output in the `_build` directory.

Once everything is built, plug the Raspberry Pi Pico W while pressing the
BOOTSEL button in order to flash it with the newly built firmware.

To flash, type `flash` in the build environment. This command invoke picotool as
a super user, to have access to usb devices. This will ask for your user
credential in order to flash the image.

# Debugging

Once the image is flashed, if all is good a web page would be served by the Pico
W, at the IP of the device on the registered network. The firmware also has UART
output on pins 16 and 17 in case of problems with the network stack.

Using the debug probes, one can connect to the within the development
environment with the `start_openocd` and `start_gdb_core0` to debug the Web
server and `start_gdb_core1` to debug the USB Host. The UART output can be
watched with `start_uart`.

# Using

Once powered, a web page is provided by the device, which list the status of the
USB as they are iterated over.

First drag and drop a UF2 image in the dedicated area and the click the "Flash
All" button. The web page would then iterate over the 64 USB ports, check if any
devices are connected, and if any flash the image on each of them.

The status of the flashing process then updates as it goes the status of the USB
which are listed on the page.
